---
title: "Annoying by Design"
date: 
draft: true
tags: ["design", "technology"]
---

It's no secret that the most successful apps, games, and social media platforms
dedicate considerable effort into making their product addictive. If they
don't, consumers would be less likely to use their product, making it less
valuable to advertisers.

I'd considered making a social media aggregator application that removes
addictive "features," such as infinite scroll, targeted advertising, and
notification badges, but I decided it would not be worth the time since I'm
rarely on Facebook anyway. (And yes, rebranded or no, it will always be
"Facebook" as far as I'm concerned.)

Instead, I'd like to dedicate that time to implement a similar idea to my own
workspace; to be annoying by design.

My hope is that the features on which I want to have had spent less time
focusing are designed in such a way as to be accessible but not too accessible.
For example, I want to spend more time focusing on reading the Bible, and less
time focusing on stock prices. So if I have a TV display, I might have it
display Bible passages as a screensaver or default view. Then, in order to
display stock prices, I could configure the TV such that I would have to hold a
button down that, when released, would revert back to the default display.

In her "Tidying Up" show, Marie Kondo suggests putting the "keep" pile of
clothes on the other side of the room as a small extra barrier to keeping
stuff. The upside to the horrific impact of the internet age on humans'
patience is that a simple thing like a 1-second delay can now be leveraged as
an effective barrier to entry.

Apps advertise themselves as systems that "Just Workâ„¢" (trademark symbol and
everything) because they want zero barriers to entry: Stupid-proof. I want to
make it so that I have to work harder to develop unhealthy habits and harder to
avoid good content.
