---
title: "Data-Driven World"
date: 
draft: true
tags: ["technology", "society", "data", "privacy"]
---

Everything now is data-driven. E-commerce vendors that can't accurately make
personalized product recommendations will inevitably fail to compete with
those that can. Successful political campaigns rely on polling data and other
quantified public sentiment in order to determine into which states and
demographics are worth investing time and money. 

This is not a new phenomenon: only a new buzzword.

"Data" is just information. Commercial enterprises have always needed to know
what products are worth building and what services are worth offering.
Democratic governments are, by nature, dependent upon the public's approval or
disapproval.

Nothing is new under the sun.

However, the reason "data" has become a hot topic recently is because of the
nature of the format in which it is increasingly commonly represented. The
scale at which data is generated and transmitted, and the availability of
access to data, has increased the value of personal data dramatically.

Kohl's doesn't care if _you_ would be more likely to buy shirt A or shirt B;
but they care very much if a significant enough demographic population to
which you belong would. This has led to many ethical issues regarding racial
profiling and bias. "Oh, they think I like Guinness just because I'm Irish?"
Well, if 80% of men, 75% of respondents of English or Irish descent, 90% of
full-time workers, and 83% of residents of the DC area all indicate they do,
then yeah, we do think you like Guinness (with 89% confidence, to be precise).
Racial bias is for another blog post though.

Data is the not-so-new currency of the world. People might not have realized
this back at the dawn of social media when they volunteered (donated) their
data (funds) to Facebook, Inc., including myself. Or, users might have been
aware and decided to purchase the service anyway; and that's just fine.

## Conceptualize the Value of Data

It's never too late to `#DeleteFacebook` or any other platform that stores
your personal data. That doesn't mean that your data is suddenly inaccessible
to any other parties as soon as you withdraw consent, but it may help to
visualize the time-value of your data.

Your family, friends, relationships, interests, location, and lots of other
data are likely to change over time. Continuous access to this data stream is
far more valuable than a snapshot or data dump at any particular moment in
time.

Consider a room in your house or apartment with a window. Removing any third
party's access to your data would be like boarding up the window and hanging a
photograph of what the view looked like. They may always hang onto that view
(some data is often better than none), but there is no 

## Important Part

Treat your data like money. Whenever you post a status update, a comment, a
blog post, or leave any trace of your presence on the web, you are generating
data from which companies know how to extract value.

That doesn't mean you shouldn't interact online; by all means, there are goods
and services that are worth it, just as there are items in stores worth your
money. Just be aware that just as time is money, so is your online activity.

How much would you charge for a stranger to learn your name? What about your
hobbies and interests? Chances are, you've happily volunteered this much
information to anyone who cares to ask, especially those who volunteer the
same. This is perfectly reasonable and polite.
